Evidence before this study
Sleep health is inextricably linked to physical and mental health. Significant literature details the negative impact of poor sleep on the metabolic, cardiovascular, immune system and respiratory health. Both poor sleep quality and quantity are also strongly associated with deficits in emotional, educational, neuropsychological, psychosocial health, well-being, and performance. Improved sleep shows the amelioration of these deficits. Yet to date, there is a paucity of research and lack of investment into access to care and community-led service delivery of sleep health in First Nations Australians. Previous data suggest that the burden of respiratory and related sleep symptoms (sleep breathing disorders) in both First Nations Australian children and adults is disproportionately higher compared to non-Indigenous Australians. Despite ongoing efforts to close the gap, a substantial health inequity still exists between First Nations Australians and non-Indigenous Australians, and, likely; this is also the case for their sleep health. There is an ongoing and even increasing need for social and emotional well-being (SEWB) services for First Nations communities due to current (such as the 2020 bushfires and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic) and pre-existing effects of colonisation and inter-generational trauma. Therefore, given the strong relationship between sleep and SEWB, assessing the state of sleep health in Australian First Nations adults may be key to scope community-led programs and services, to improve sleep and subsequently overall health substantially.

Added value of this study
The state of sleep health and/or the major contributors affecting sleep in First Nations Australian populations are significantly unexplored. This review builds on previous research conducted in Australia regarding the prevalence and impact of respiratory sleep disorders in First Nations Australians but updates and broadens the scope to include non-respiratory sleep disorders (insomnia, sleep pattern/timing disorders). This study quantifies differences in the prevalence of sleep problems compared to normative data and discusses how and why these data are important for understanding and improving the state of sleep health and subsequent health outcomes. Determinants and contributors of poor sleep are presented. These data show that improving sleep via appropriate and community-informed service delivery offers the novel opportunity to impact the health and well-being of First Nations Australians.

Implications of all the available evidence
This review provides the first exploration of the state of sleep health in adult First Nations Australians. In conjunction with previous literature, this study offers a more comprehensive picture of the burden of sleep problems in this target population. The evidence of poor sleep presented here (defined here as problems with initiating and maintaining sleep, disrupted/restless sleep or excessive sleepiness, and sleep/wake rhythm disruptions) suggests that First Nations’ sleep disorders are common, indeed more common than for non-Indigenous Australians and more consequential. Given the aforementioned and recognised gap between the health of First Nations Australians compared to their non-Aboriginal peers, these data offer the opportunity of utilising sleep as a key predictive indicator of general health. Furthermore, because sleep health is modifiable, the prospect of improving sleep and subsequently improving downstream variables (including those chronic diseases related to poor sleep such as diabetes and hypertension, more common in First Nations Australians), appears possible and innovative. This review provides important information to support the need for investment into better access to care and sleep health evaluation, diagnosis, treatment, and healthcare delivery for sleep health in First Nations Australians.